RENAME TO 05-4-graphical-mode-login-behind-the-scenes.txt

source: https://unix.stackexchange.com/questions/156549/terminology-reconciliation-display-manager-vs-session-manager-windowing-syste/156556

    (A by Gilles 'SO- stop being evil'):

        A _windowing system_ is a software component that
        provides windows for applications to draw in
        and can display these windows on the screen.
        The "X Window System" is the standard windowing system on Unix systems;
        outside Mac OS X, it doesn't really have competition
        (this may change if "Wayland" or "Mir" become viable).
        The X Window System has a client-server architecture,
        where the server (known as an X server or X11 server) manages the display hardware
        and clients are applications.
        Applications that display windows on an X server
        are known as X clients or X applications (or X11 clients or X11 applications).

        As far as applications are concerned, what matters is
        the communication protocol between applications and the windowing system.
        This protocol is known as X11 (11th version of the protocol, the current version
        since 1987), with several common extensions.

        ---

        (?) X.Org :
            is an implementation of the X Window System;
            
            has been the de facto standard implementation since the project started in 2004,
            taking over from XFree86;
            
            includes both generic and hardware-specific parts of the X server
            as well as a number of client libraries and utilities.

        ---

        A _display manager_ is an X11 application whose purpose is
        to authenticate a user (typically by prompting for a user name and password)
        and, upon successful authentication, to start a session as that user.
        The display manager
        runs as root (at least in part)
        and terminates or at least leaves the foreground while a user is logged in.
        The display manager takes care of starting an X server which serves
        both the login prompt
        and the subsequent user session.

        A _session manager_ is a program whose job is to start other programs.
        It's the first program started as part of a user's interactive session.
        It can be started by
            (a) the display manager (after it has dropped privileges), [or]
            (b) some program running as the user
                if the user has logged in by some means other than a display manager,
                typically with a text mode login prompt;
                this is usually done via the `startx` script which takes care of:
                    - starting an X server,
                    - running the session manager, and
                    - killing the X server when done.
        The session manager can be anything

            from a simple terminal emulator in which the user can type commands,

            to a script that starts several predefined programs,

            to a sophisticated program that remembers applications and window positions
            from one session to the next.

        The session ends when the session manager exits.

        A _window manager_ is an X client with a special role. It:
            (a) receives notifications when new windows are created and
            (b) typically traps a number of user events (key and mouse bindings).
        Its job is
        to choose where to display windows and at what size,
        to show and hide windows,
        to display window decorations (borders, title bar, …), etc.
        Pretty much every window manager can serve as a session manager
        [because] the window manager has to run for the whole session anyway.
        Most window managers
        offer a way for users to start new programs via menus or key bindings,
        though strictly speaking this isn't part of the window manager['s] role.

        ---

        A _desktop environment_ is a collection of X clients that comprises at least
            (a) a session manager
            (b) a window manager
            (c) a _graphical shell_
                (
                in the case of an X Window System,
                [it] consists of
                an X window manager,
                as well as one or multiple programs providing the functionality
                to start installed applications,
                to manage open windows and virtual desktops,
                and often to suppor the widget engine;

                In the case of macOS,
                Quartz could be thought of as the windowing system,
                and the (?)[graphical] shell consists of
                the Finder, the Dock, SystemUIServer, and Mission Control.
                )
            (d) a collection of utilities
                such as menus, docks, clipboard manager, macro facility, etc.
